Dzogchen teaching is what is called Dzogchen. Dzogchen is the very word, but it means "Great Com
pleted,"
and of course translated "Great Perfection." But if we translate it, Dzogchen word is "Great Com
pleted."
Great Completed is not small completion. It's not medium completion. It is "Great Completed."
One is completed. There are many teachings. Entirely Buddha teaching is completed within Dzogchen.
Entirely that.
It's not just only the basic Buddhist school teachings are completed, or only the Sotr Mahayana is
completed,
or only the Vedayana is completed. Entirely Buddha teaching is completed in Dzogchen.
Therefore, it's called "Great Dzogchen," or "Great Dzogchen." Dzogchen word is not small Dzogchen
word.
Dzogchen is not a Dzogchen word. It's not. It's Dzogchen.
And along with that, that means the entire Buddha teaching is complete.
That means all the practice aspect of the entire teaching, the day one Buddha is teaching,
the entire Mahabharata, all the practices are completed in Dzogchen teachings.
Everything is completed. And then Dzogchen, with that meaning, while we practice,
when we practice, there's all practices combined Dzogchen, skillful means and versatile practices.
Everything is skillful means and versatile practices. That is also completed. Dzogchen, there's
nothing is missing.
Skillful means practices, complete human practices.
Everything is trying to make one more clarity, clear of the skillful means and versatile practices.
Everything, according to accumulation practices, versatile merit and accumulate humility.
Skillful means practice is the accumulation practice.
And the versatile practices is then, or the versatile practices is versatile merit choice.
Or sometimes, versatile merit jury activities and invisible merit jury activities.
And at the very end, the teacher said, "Nam ji, so nam ji, so nam ji, ji, so."
The versatile merit jury activities of the something that we can see,
that is the merit jury, merit, accumulation merit.
In visible merit jury activities of the wisdom.
That is, so this skillful means, versatile are combined token.
Token. That is what the really Dzogchen is.
Dzogchen is not just we are looking one side corner and trying to grab that.
And we do that. Then we are misinterpreting.
And we are not only the full panoramic wheel or panoramic gauntlet.
We are not really activating the whole panoramic gauntlet of the practice.
All 360 angles of the practice of the Dzogchen, ignoring them.
Good. Therefore, look in a neat life store of all those great masters.
Masters, when we read the life store of those great masters,
how they are going to the earth.
Going to the earth.
How much they are practical.
How much they have common senses.
How many they have thought force.
How many they have respect when you approach it every once.
Yet so humble and so simple.
Don't do the earth. Don't do the earth.
And that means they are keeping perfectly the guidelines of the basic Buddhist school teachings.
Perfect Buddhist teaching guidelines.
They are not saying I am Dzogchen practitioners and I am going to ignore the Buddhist possibilities
or the basic Buddhist teachings.
Or I am Dzogchen practitioners. I don't need Mahayana teachers.
These are super jhanas.
They are not saying all combined.
If we don't do combined, everything, if we could lift it up, we don't.
Then what it becomes?
Then as I say it is, then we become narrow.
We become skeptical.
Then maybe it will lead us to disappointments.
And then we will fill feelings, spiritual failures.
And we don't want, we like to build up all of them.
Therefore every time in the teaching it is reflecting the four renowned sessions with the devotees.
These four renowned sessions are points that will change our mind.
And many of you know, I know, I heard that many times.
But really we know that for now.
Everything really carefully, what are those?
For example, we call the 18 endowments of the British lives.
What are the 18 endowments?
Everything, what are those 18 endowments?
Truly we have that.
But what are those?
Why, a great teacher, Buddha said this 18 endowments, the British life.
He has principally two meanings, two purposes.
Bring more joy and appreciation, more grateful of the situation and circumstances.
The same time have the courage and commitment, use this beautiful life.
Meaningful. Meaningful now, meaningful future.
Meaningful now for us, meaningful now for others.
Meaningful us for future, meaningful for others.
That is the one reason.
So I'm going to highlight this whole, this 18 endowments.
I'm going to highlight it.
Even though many of you know that, some of you know, maybe few of you know, don't heard that.
Me too, I heard this so many times, but I really like that.
And that is now, add freedoms, first add freedoms.
And now, what we think, what we are now, who are now, what we are now.
And first is, if I listed those X, first is hill.
And then, hunger ghost.
And then, animals.
And then, long life gods.
And the next one is, then, the barbarians in the teaching said,
there was a lot of them, a lot of them, many of you know about a lot of them, a lot of them.
And then, next one is, completely, sculpticles.
Sculpticles.
Oh, long time, little bit.
Wrong idea, wrong beliefs.
Sculpticles, that's what you are talking about.
Then is, no bullet.
Bullet never came, or have no, no teaching well, but at all.
Completely.
So those four, sorry, those add are known as, if we have those add, we are not freedom.
And we are in those, some of those, one of those, all two of those.
And we are completely in that status.
We are not complete freedom.
Freedom.
What kind of not freedom?
We are not freedom to grow our inner realization.
We don't have opportunities to develop.
Our inner realization, we are completely cold.
Samsara, mundane, habitual, the poisonous, boring qualities.
We are completely cold.
We don't have any opportunity to turn our inner, beautiful, glorious qualities.
Or bring up that.
So therefore, we think, ourselves, think myself now.
For example, I'm not in helix.
How great, how beautiful.
Generally, what means?
It means, six rams is as long, according to the teaching.
Six rams are like our territory that we roam.
R, O, A, and we roam, according to common wind.
There's nothing is certainly reserved for us, for all the time.
We roam.
And that is pushed by the common and common winds.
So we can be in helix, according to the teaching.
We can be in hungry glassware.
We can be in any other glassware situation.
But now, tell it to ourselves, we're not in that state.
We're not in those states.
So therefore, how grateful.
How beautiful, how spiritual.
That means, again, in the Buddha teaching, what is it?
What you did in the past, even though you don't see in the past lives,
but read your prison situations.
Prison situation will tell what you did in the past.
And even though we don't know the future, future what will happen,
but read your prison action, activities,
that will pretty much you can detox.
Or embrace the future, our destination, and about future, our situations.
Therefore, when we have all that, that freedoms,
that means, truly, we did something quite good.
This is not just happened by co-accidental.
It's not just by happiness, by itself.
Truly, it has beautiful cause.
That cause in the conditions, not given by someone else,
but as a Lord in us.
They cannot, they know it.
So that means, we did something good in the past,
even though we don't know the past or see the past.
But seeing this, our situation now, on the world,
on the state, that can judge our past.
We did quite good.
That was also virtuous, good activity.
Many times, the teaching said, it's all virtuous activity that you did.
Many good moral and conduct activities that you did in the past.
That's what it is really like, beautiful life now.
So therefore, feel happy in the joy and the appreciation of these,
and have the courage and the commitment to use.
Now, if we have the aiding, these air freedoms,
then, if we don't have the ten luxuries, again we are missing.
We have not fully equipped to develop and discover
our inner beautiful glories and richness qualities.
Those are the ten luxuries.
Five are connected externally.
Five is connected from supporters,
and five is connected with one's own son.
In the Tibetan, the Buddha teaching measured around Yerma and Yerma.
Oh, the luxuries that comes from others
and luxuries that comes from one's own son, five luxuries.
Five luxuries from others, five luxuries from one's own son.
Those are the five luxuries.
These five luxuries, again, of course,
we know ten, eight endowments that we heard so many times.
And those are also in the books, too.
The words were my perfect teachers.
But how much do we care to them?
Maybe we did that one time, but did we remember them?
That means we did a contemplation endow.
Starting and a contemplation.
Today's endow.
In a way, they are kind of passing through.
When you drive in a highway, we see many things from the Lord.
But, just with all this wonderful beauty,
for all this is not good, but what you see,
what is just kind of escapes away.
Similarly, when we are reading the books,
listen to the teachings, many times it kind of escapes away.
And we are always looking something nugget, nugget, nugget.
That we lose the ground.
Oh, I like that. I like that.
And we started thinking of that,
mortal karma, not with practical thinking, thinking,
and following that.
That we follow with our consortium ego clings.
According with our teaching, from the beginning of this time until now,
what we ended up or what we are now, that.
All ego-cling activities, we like ego-cling activities.
We don't say, "I don't like that ego-cling activities."
Never say, "We like ego-cling."
"I love, I like this, this, that."
And kind of that.
But at a reality level, what do we really go to?
Always worry, always stressful, always un-goutful, always no rest.
And then also that reflects according to the teaching,
to the physical condition, in the environmental situation.
And it's always something wrong, always something missing,
always something wrong.
That we own is the ego-resolve.
We are flagging with ego-clicking.
So now, with this understanding, we should really, again,
highlight this, because while I am talking this,
the ego-clicking is, as I said many times, you all know,
and we learn from the great masters all the time,
it's the greatest teaching.
And also we have to attain reflectivity.
It's very important, the ground issues, ground qualities,
the foundations, it's important.
So now, the five lectures from the others is,
first one is, Buddha came, at least the first part,
and then go there, all that.
And first parts are, Buddha came to this goal.
And the second is, Buddha gave the teachings.
And the third is, teachings are still existing.
And then, the fourth is, still there's many practitioners
who practice.
And then, not just the practice, and the fifth one is,
there's also the teacher available, qualified teachers available.
So those are known as five luxuries from the others.
Why is he using that?
And according to Buddha's teaching, there is some eons,
Buddha never comes, so there's no Buddha.
Those are in Buddhism, named eons of the dark, darkness eons.
There is no Buddha came.
So we are not that happy.
For us, it's not Buddha came.
We are the eons of light.
And actually in the Buddha's teaching, so this eon is not fortunate eons.
We are one of those fortunate eons, experienced, or captured,
one who capture them.
This is not just fortunate eons.
Outside, I saw that.
We are out of that fortunate eons.
So Buddha came, Buddha kept him when he came,
two thousand, six hundred years ago, according.
I'm a different chronology system, but I cannot believe that.
And then, even Buddha came in this world.
Sometimes, Buddha don't give teachings.
They called him.
Even Buddha came like teachings.
And so that also happened.
For example, Buddha's left first, like he conquered,
when he left the kingdom, kingdom, kingdom,
kingdom, kingdom, kingdom, kingdom.
So Buddha came, Buddha came in this world.
And so, Buddha came, Buddha came in this world.
And so, Buddha came in this world.
And so, the santa members, we have similar idea, similar will, similar will, similar goal.
It was all so supportive, so beneficial, so helpful to the longer part.
We have that.
And that is what really is so beautiful.
Then, even the santa members, if there is no qualified teachers or teachers available,
there must still be, we are not completely equal, equal.
And that is not what we are.
We have all met so many great masters.
One after another.
We can select, we can choose, you know.
How fortunate, how lucky we are.
Really, all of them.
Those all known as luxury, that comes from others.
Then, you know, others outside.
Then there is five luxuries, one's own, own self.
Ones that are related with our own self.
And again, our listed.
First, being born as human beings.
Partly human beings.
And the second is, is all the organs and senses are clay and intact.
And born where there is teachings available.
Third is, we are born to teach.
And then fifth is, our professional activity is not complete,
not completely, kind of like reverse our practice.
So our professional job or our activity is kind of lined up with it quite now.
And the fifth one is, devoted to the teaching.
Devoted to teaching.
So that, we have that.
Partly we are born as human beings.
Human beings.
Which is so wonderful.
According to the Buddha teaching, there is so many beings of the six realms.
But human being is so special.
It has great opportunities to develop and grow and discover our beautiful beings.
Perfect.
Kind of like connections to the skull.
Right?
And we saw how we don't have that.
So that therefore, we should grateful that we are born as human beings.
As I said, any of you know that.
And the second is being as human.
And the second is, then all the senses are.
Senses are perfect.
We are very intelligent in senses.
And the third.
Born where there is teaching available.
Even there are human beings.
If there is no teaching available, even you learn to practice this.
Then it's kind of stuck.
It's stuck.
You don't have that.
There are all these opportunities.
And that happened many times.
Many times we received some emails.
I'm so sorry that we don't have any teachers.
But the new teachers in this area, could you help me?
We received those through the emails.
So this is definitely going to happen.
And then our professional job, the activity,
is something also completely not negative.
Whatever we do, we do something kind of lined up.
It happens to others, it happens to ourselves.
And which is good, very sweet.
And then, the fifth one is a devotee done.
Now everything of all that eating endowments, eating endowments,
first of all, at freedom is so special.
At freedom.
Above that, there are ten lunches.
Last two are out of ten lunches.
So that means, two are from the lunches from others.
Last two are the lunches from one's own self.
It's so special.
So lunches.
Last two are from others.
What are those?
That there's a sangha and there's teachers.
Yeah.
If we don't have, even all the rest, we have luxuries, then we stop.
That is again the rarest or rarest than last two lunches.
Then from our luxuries, last two are again rarest.
Rare, it's very precious.
Last two are again from our sangha to those two.
That we have faith and interest in the dharma.
That's it.
And that, that last two are.
And we completely can't have the wrong occupations, wrong professional jobs.
They're completely cold.
Even if we have every situation we devote, that then is nothing.
And then, particularly, the last one is devotion and pain.
If we don't have the pain, the devotion, the motivation,
no matter how many luxuries you have, nothing's going to happen.
That is not.
So therefore, if we look at every of those add freedoms, how fortunate I am.
If we look at every of those add five luxuries of others, how fortunate we are.
And if we look at every of these five luxuries of one's own son,
how fortunate we are.
Truly, really good.
So those are known as eating endowments.
Then, I will talk one, just list it.
List the names of the days.
And add temporarily, or suddenly arising.
Arising obstacles to our freedoms.
Those are the great masters, Unhiba Listing.
First is tomato, raging emotions of the five bosoms.
Tomato.
And very dull, second is very dull, and the mind is completely blown up.
That is second.
And third is completely associated with wrong negative friends.
Thaar.
And the port is very heavy laziness.
Laziness, very heavy laziness.
And third is, and so many bad garments coming one after another.
Those are known as in the Buddha teaching, suffering after suffering.
One after another, suffering after suffering.
And then seventh is, you are completely controlled by the power of others.
Others.
All as the slavery, slavery is all this.
Completely kind of slavery.
And fourth is, sorry not fourth, and is, returning the practice.
Or in other words, hypocrites of the practitioners.
Kind of returning the practices.
Again, even we have the eating endowments perfectly, beautifully,
but at those camps, then we are losing those luxury scholars.
We are damaging the luxury scholars.
So therefore, again, courage and commitment, confidence,
and with strong devotion, keep up, be held up, strong.
And emotion comes, all those, you receive all the teachings.
Apply to those techniques.
Whatever the emotions are disturbed, not chasing after them.
Emotions. Chasing after the emotions.
Then that is what the gracious teacher, Buddha used examples.
Chasing the stone by the doghis.
Droving through the stone to the doghi,
and many times, drop chasing the stones.
So if we chase the emotions, it goes on and on.
So they have activated the teachings there.
And then when the kind of lady or this dullness, stupid things,
please stand in that courage and commitment
and do the practice, such as the magickities,
or something like that, lighten our heart and mind.
In a verse, we all have the inner verse.
There is no difference, according to what I teach you.
Buddha nature is everywhere, just going to begin to shine.
We are going to shine out fully with that.
Every removal of the kind of process to remove the habit of patterns.
So therefore, kind of restate and study, even though it's difficult.
Starting, meditate.
And they didn't want to do the accumulation, meditate practices.
Sacrum embolises, ostriches, cleaning the temples,
shrines, like beautiful arrangements.
There's a beautiful story that you know in the Buddha's time.
Buddha is one of the Arhathas,
who is now among one of the 16 Arhathas in the Buddha teaching.
But when he was born, he was so dumb, dumb, dumb,
that he don't remember anything.
When he teach something, when he teach that one verse teaching,
the first verse you teach, the first verse of one line teach,
and when the second line comes, the first one completely forget it.
And the second line, the third line comes,
he completely forgets the second one.
Like that kind of a sentence.
Don't do anything.
There's beautiful stories, I won't tell those enough.
Maybe you heard that.
But at the end, what Buddha did?
He said, he can't do anything.
Anything.
But yet he become the monk.
He will learn the monk, because he's so desperate situation.
He's barely died.
His house, his family completely gone,
and they just become one after another tragedy happened.
Then he just like little boy there, hanging on the street,
and he never know where to go, what to do.
And the great teacher Buddha came,
particularly Shari Buddha,
as they come to follow us and say that he feels so happy,
and he thought to give teaching,
but when he give teaching, he don't remember,
he don't know anything.
And then what great teacher Buddha said,
"And you know how to clean the temple?"
He said, "Yes, I know that."
So he start to clean the temple.
The temple of the Sharasta,
or the other girls cleaning, cleaning, cleaning.
He's cleaning.
Very diligently, beautifully cleaning that.
And because the mandatory activity in the Buddha's blessings,
and he relaxes, finally start singing the song of the realizations.
This cleaning is not cleaning of the dirt,
cleaning of the poison.
This not cleaning is not cleaning of the fire,
it's cleaning of the, again, impure.
[Hindi]
Singing that, everybody thought,
"How do you got that knowledge?"
He said, "It happened."
So then, it is with more teaching.
Soon he become one of the great Arathas,
and he is one of the 18 Arathas.
The sickling Arathas, that's the really how it is.
So therefore, this is the,
I may hope that you can develop.
It's even though there is a limit.
And then, the negative friends.
So many times, it's always called as a friend.
But our way of thinking,
and our conduct, way of their thinking,
the way of their conduct is quite opposite.
And opposite, we did virtues, we did dharma.
So therefore, again, trying to watch out.
They have always a spiritual friend.
Sangha friend is so important.
So important, so precious.
So those are, then I can go maybe later in future.
So those are, generally, I told you about this precious,
what's it called?
Four, these four points.
Four points that change our reverse, our mind.
And so that we can use some of that.
I spoke today, really, and highlighted it,
of the meaning of the endowment step.
And now, we will go to the next slide.